P1: 1/1

P2: 1/2

QC: 1/1

T1: 2

FRONT-7T

Rosen-2311T MHIA017-Rosen-v5.cls

May 13, 2011

10:21

xiv

Preface

mistakes students make in discrete mathematics, plus sample tests and a sample crib sheet for
each chapter designed to help students prepare for exams.

(ISBN-10: 0-07-735350-1)

(ISBN-13: 978-0-07-735350-6)

INSTRUCTORS RESOURCE GUIDE
This manual, available on the website and in
printed form by request for instructors, contains full solutions to even-numbered exercises in
the text. Suggestions on how to teach the material in each chapter of the book are provided,
including the points to stress in each section and how to put the material into perspective. It
also offers sample tests for each chapter and a test bank containing over 1500 exam questions to
choose from. Answers to all sample tests and test bank questions are included. Finally, several
sample syllabi are presented for courses with differing emphases and student ability levels.

(ISBN-10: 0-07-735349-8)

(ISBN-13: 978-0-07-735349-0)

Acknowledgments

I would like to thank the many instructors and students at a variety of schools who have used
this book and provided me with their valuable feedback and helpful suggestions. Their input
has made this a much better book than it would have been otherwise. I especially want to thank
Jerrold Grossman, Jean-Claude Evard, and Georgia Mederer for their technical reviews of the
seventh edition and their eagle eyes, which have helped ensure the accuracy of this book. I
also appreciate the help provided by all those who have submitted comments via the website.

I thank the reviewers of this seventh and the six previous editions. These reviewers have
provided much helpful criticism and encouragement to me. I hope this edition lives up to their
high expectations.

Reviewers for the Seventh Edition

Philip Barry

T.J. Duda

Jerry Ianni

University of Minnesota, Minneapolis

Columbus State Community College

LaGuardia Community College

Bruce Elenbogen

Ravi Janardan

University of Michigan, Dearborn

University of Minnesota, Minneapolis

Nanyang Technological University

Wright State University

University of California, Los Angeles

University of North Florida

Miklos Bona

University of Florida

Kirby Brown

Queens College

John Carter

University of Toronto

Narendra Chaudhari

Allan Cochran

University of Arkansas

Daniel Cunningham

Buffalo State College

George Davis

Georgia State University

Andrzej Derdzinski

The Ohio State University

Norma Elias

Purdue University,
Calumet-Hammond

Herbert Enderton

Anthony Evans

Kim Factor

Marquette University

Margaret Fleck

Peter Gillespie

Fayetteville State University

Johannes Hattingh

Georgia State University

Ronald Dotzel

Ken Holladay

University of Missouri-St. Louis

University of New Orleans

Norliza Katuk

University of Utara Malaysia

William Klostermeyer

Przemo Kranz

University of Mississippi

Jaromy Kuhl

University of West Florida

Loredana Lanzani

Steven Leonhardi

Winona State University

Xu Liutong

Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications

Vladimir Logvinenko

De Anza Community College

University of Illinois, Champaign

University of Arkansas, Fayetteville

\x0cP1: 1/1

P2: 1/2

QC: 1/1

T1: 2

FRONT-7T

Rosen-2311T MHIA017-Rosen-v5.cls

May 13, 2011

10:21

Preface

xv

Darrell Minor

Columbus State Community College

Auburn University

Keith Olson

Utah Valley University

Yongyuth Permpoontanalarp
King Mongkuts University of
Technology, Thonburi

Chris Rodger

Sukhit Singh

David Snyder

Texas State University, San Marcos

Queens College

Texas State University, San Marcos

Christopher Swanson
Ashland University

Bon Sy

Matthew Walsh

Indiana-Purdue University, Fort
Wayne

Gideon Weinstein

Western Governors University

Galin Piatniskaia

Wasin So

University of Missouri, St. Louis

San Jose State University

Stefan Robila

Bogdan Suceava

David Wilczynski

Montclair State University

California State University, Fullerton

University of Southern California

I would like to thank Bill Stenquist, Executive Editor, for his advocacy, enthusiasm, and
support. His assistance with this edition has been essential. I would also like to thank the original
editor, Wayne Yuhasz, whose insights and skills helped ensure the books success, as well as all
the many other previous editors of this book.

I want to express my appreciation to the staff of RPK Editorial Services for their valuable
work on this edition, including Rose Kernan, who served as both the developmental editor and
the production editor, and the other members of the RPK team, Fred Dahl, Martha McMaster,
Erin Wagner, Harlan James, and Shelly Gerger-Knecthl. I thank Paul Mailhot of PreTeX, Inc.,
the compositor, for the tremendous amount to work he devoted to producing this edition, and
for his intimate knowledge of LaTeX. Thanks also to Danny Meldung of Photo Affairs, Inc.,
who was resourceful obtaining images for the new biographical footnotes.

The accuracy and quality of this new edition owe much to Jerry Grossman and Jean-Claude
Evard, who checked the entire manuscript for technical accuracy and Georgia Mederer, who
checked the accuracy of the answers at the end of the book and the solutions in the Students
Solutions Guide and Instructors Resource Guide. As usual, I cannot thank Jerry Grossman
enough for all his work authoring these two essential ancillaries.

I would also express my appreciation the Science, Engineering, and Mathematics (SEM)
Division of McGraw-Hill Higher Education for their valuable support for this new edition and
the associated media content. In particular, thanks go to Kurt Strand: President, SEM, McGraw-
Hill Higher Education, Marty Lange: Editor-in-Chief, SEM, Michael Lange: Editorial Director,
Raghothaman Srinivasan: Global Publisher, Bill Stenquist: Executive Editor, Curt Reynolds:
Executive Marketing Manager, Robin A. Reed: Project Manager, Sandy Ludovissey: Buyer,
Lorraine Buczek: In-house Developmental Editor, Brenda Rowles: Design Coordinator, Carrie
K. Burger: Lead Photo Research Coordinator, and Tammy Juran: Media Project Manager.

Kenneth H. Rosen

\x0cP1: 1/1

P2: 1/2

QC: 1/1

T1: 2

FRONT-7T

Rosen-2311T MHIA017-Rosen-v5.cls

May 13, 2011

10:21

The Companion Website

The extensive companion website accompanying this text has been substantially enhanced

for the seventh edition This website is accessible at www.mhhe.com/rosen. The homepage
shows the Information Center, and contains login links for the sites Student Site and Instructor
Site. Key features of each area are described below:

THE INFORMATION CENTER

The Information Center contains basic information about the book including the expanded
table of contents (including subsection heads), the preface, descriptions of the ancillaries, and
a sample chapter. It also provides a link that can be used to submit errata reports and other
feedback about the book.

STUDENT SITE

The Student site contains a wealth of resources available for student use, including the

following, tied into the text wherever the special icons displayed below are found in the text:

(cid:2) Extra Examples You can nd a large number of additional examples on the site, covering
all chapters of the book. These examples are concentrated in areas where students often
ask for additional material. Although most of these examples amplify the basic concepts,
more-challenging examples can also be found here.

(cid:2) Interactive Demonstration Applets

These applets enable you to interactively explore
how important algorithms work, and are tied directly to material in the text with linkages to
examples and exercises. Additional resources are provided on how to use and apply these
applets.

(cid:2) Self Assessments

These interactive guides help you assess your understanding of 14 key
concepts, providing a question bank where each question includes a brief tutorial followed
by a multiple-choice question. If you select an incorrect answer, advice is provided to help
you understand your error. Using these Self Assessments, you should be able to diagnose
your problems and nd appropriate help.

(cid:2) Web Resources Guide This guide provides annotated links to hundreds of external websites
containing relevant material such as historical and biographical information, puzzles and
problems, discussions, applets, programs, and more. These links are keyed to the text by page
number.

Additional resources in the Student site include:

(cid:2) Exploring Discrete Mathematics This ancillary provides help for using a computer alge-
bra system to do a wide range of computations in discrete mathematics. Each chapter provides
a description of relevant functions in the computer algebra system and how they are used, pro-
grams to carry out computations in discrete mathematics, examples, and exercises that can be
worked using this computer algebra system. Two versions, Exploring Discrete Mathematics
with MapleTM and Exploring Discrete Mathematics with MathematicaTM will be available.
This ancillary contains 24 chapterseach with
its own set of exercisespresenting a wide variety of interesting and important applications

(cid:2) Applications of Discrete Mathematics

xvi

\x0cP1: 1/1

P2: 1/2

QC: 1/1

T1: 2

FRONT-7T

Rosen-2311T MHIA017-Rosen-v5.cls

May 13, 2011

10:21

The Companion Website

xvii

covering three general areas in discrete mathematics: discrete structures, combinatorics, and
graph theory. These applications are ideal for supplementing the text or for independent study.

(cid:2) A Guide to Proof-Writing

This guide provides additional help for writing proofs, a skill
that many students nd difcult to master. By reading this guide at the beginning of the
course and periodically thereafter when proof writing is required, you will be rewarded as
your proof-writing ability grows. (Also available in the Students Solutions Guide.)

(cid:2) Common Mistakes in Discrete Mathematics

This guide includes a detailed list of com-
mon misconceptions that students of discrete mathematics often have and the kinds of errors
they tend to make. You are encouraged to review this list from time to time to help avoid these
common traps. (Also available in the Students Solutions Guide.)

(cid:2) Advice on Writing Projects This guide offers helpful hints and suggestions for the Writing
Projects in the text, including an extensive bibliography of helpful books and articles for
research; discussion of various resources available in print and online; tips on doing library
research; and suggestions on how to write well. (Also available in the Students Solutions
Guide.)

(cid:2) The Virtual Discrete Mathematics Tutor This extensive ancillary provides students with
valuable assistance as they make the transition from lower-level courses to discrete mathemat-
ics. The errors students have made when studying discrete mathematics using this text has been
analyzed to design this resource. Students will be able to get many of their questions answered
and can overcome many obstacles via this ancillaries. The Virtual Discrete Mathematics Tutor
is expected to be available in the fall of 2012.

INSTRUCTOR SITE

This part of the website provides access to all of the resources on the Student Site, as well as
these resources for instructors:

(cid:2) Suggested Syllabi Detailed course outlines are shown, offering suggestions for courses

with different emphases and different student backgrounds and ability levels.

(cid:2) Teaching Suggestions

This guide contains detailed teaching suggestions for instructors,
including chapter overviews for the entire text, detailed remarks on each section, and comments
on the exercise sets.

(cid:2) Printable Tests

Printable tests are offered in TeX and Word format for every chapter, and

can be customized by instructors.

(cid:2) PowerPoints Lecture Slides and PowerPoint Figures and Tables An extensive collection
of PowerPoint slides for all chapters of the text are provided for instructor use. In addition,
images of all gures and tables from the text are provided as PowerPoint slides.

(cid:2) Homework Delivery System An extensive homework delivery system, under development
for availability in fall 2012, will provide questions tied directly to the text, so that students
will be able to do assignments on-line. Moreover, they will be able to use this system in a
tutorial mode. This system will be able to automatically grade assignments, and deliver free-
form student input to instructors for their own analysis. Course management capabilities will
be provided that will allow instructors to create assignments, automatically assign and grade
homework, quiz, and test questions from a bank of questions tied directly to the text, create
and edit their own questions, manage course announcements and due dates, and track student
progress.

\x0cP1: 1/1

P2: 1/2

QC: 1/1

T1: 2

FRONT-7T

Rosen-2311T MHIA017-Rosen-v5.cls

May 13, 2011

10:21

To the Student

What is discrete mathematics? Discrete mathematics is the part of mathematics devoted to

the study of discrete objects. (Here discrete means consisting of distinct or unconnected

elements.) The kinds of problems solved using discrete mathematics include:

(cid:2) How many ways are there to choose a valid password on a computer system?
(cid:2) What is the probability of winning a lottery?
(cid:2) Is there a link between two computers in a network?
(cid:2) How can I identify spam e-mail messages?
(cid:2) How can I encrypt a message so that no unintended recipient can read it?
(cid:2) What is the shortest path between two cities using a transportation system?
(cid:2) How can a list of integers be sorted so that the integers are in increasing order?
(cid:2) How many steps are required to do such a sorting?
(cid:2) How can it be proved that a sorting algorithm correctly sorts a list?
(cid:2) How can a circuit that adds two integers be designed?
(cid:2) How many valid Internet addresses are there?

You will learn the discrete structures and techniques needed to solve problems such as these.

More generally, discrete mathematics is used whenever objects are counted, when relation-
ships between nite (or countable) sets are studied, and when processes involving a nite number
of steps are analyzed. A key reason for the growth in the importance of discrete mathematics is
that information is stored and manipulated by computing machines in a discrete fashion.

WHY STUDY DISCRETE MATHEMATICS?
There are several important reasons for
studying discrete mathematics. First, through this course you can develop your mathematical
maturity: that is, your ability to understand and create mathematical arguments. You will not get
very far in your studies in the mathematical sciences without these skills.

Second, discrete mathematics is the gateway to more advanced courses in all parts of
the mathematical sciences. Discrete mathematics provides the mathematical foundations for
many computer science courses including data structures, algorithms, database theory, automata
theory, formal languages, compiler theory, computer security, and operating systems. Students
nd these courses much more difcult when they have not had the appropriate mathematical
foundations from discrete math. One student has sent me an e-mail message saying that she
used the contents of this book in every computer science course she took!

Math courses based on the material studied in discrete mathematics include logic, set theory,
number theory, linear algebra, abstract algebra, combinatorics, graph theory, and probability
theory (the discrete part of the subject).

Also, discrete mathematics contains the necessary mathematical background for solving
problems in operations research (including many discrete optimization techniques), chemistry,
engineering, biology, and so on. In the text, we will study applications to some of these areas.
Many students nd their introductory discrete mathematics course to be signicantly more
challenging than courses they have previously taken. One reason for this is that one of the
primary goals of this course is to teach mathematical reasoning and problem solving, rather
than a discrete set of skills. The exercises in this book are designed to reect this goal. Although
there are plenty of exercises in this text similar to those addressed in the examples, a large

xviii

\x0cP1: 1/1

P2: 1/2

QC: 1/1

T1: 2

FRONT-7T

Rosen-2311T MHIA017-Rosen-v5.cls

May 13, 2011

10:21

To the Student

xix

percentage of the exercises require original thought. This is intentional. The material discussed
in the text provides the tools needed to solve these exercises, but your job is to successfully
apply these tools using your own creativity. One of the primary goals of this course is to learn
how to attack problems that may be somewhat different from any you may have previously
seen. Unfortunately, learning how to solve only particular types of exercises is not sufcient for
success in developing the problem-solving skills needed in subsequent courses and professional
work. This text addresses many different topics, but discrete mathematics is an extremely diverse
and large area of study. One of my goals as an author is to help you develop the skills needed
to master the additional material you will need in your own future pursuits.

THE EXERCISES
I would like to offer some advice about how you can best learn discrete
mathematics (and other subjects in the mathematical and computing sciences).You will learn the
most by actively working exercises. I suggest that you solve as many as you possibly can. After
working the exercises your instructor has assigned, I encourage you to solve additional exercises
such as those in the exercise sets following each section of the text and in the supplementary
exercises at the end of each chapter. (Note the key explaining the markings preceding exercises.)

Key to the Exercises

no marking




A routine exercise
A difcult exercise
An extremely challenging exercise
An exercise containing a result used in the book (Table 1 on the
following page shows where these exercises are used.)

(Requires calculus ) An exercise whose solution requires the use of limits or concepts

from differential or integral calculus

The best approach is to try exercises yourself before you consult the answer section at the
end of this book. Note that the odd-numbered exercise answers provided in the text are answers
only and not full solutions; in particular, the reasoning required to obtain answers is omitted in
these answers. The Students Solutions Guide, available separately, provides complete, worked
solutions to all odd-numbered exercises in this text. When you hit an impasse trying to solve an
odd-numbered exercise, I suggest you consult the Students Solutions Guide and look for some
guidance as to how to solve the problem. The more work you do yourself rather than passively
reading or copying solutions, the more you will learn. The answers and solutions to the even-
numbered exercises are intentionally not available from the publisher; ask your instructor if you
have trouble with these.

WEB RESOURCES
You are strongly encouraged to take advantage of additional re-
sources available on the Web, especially those on the companion website for this book found
at www.mhhe.com/rosen. You will nd many Extra Examples designed to clarify key concepts;
Self Assessments for gauging how well you understand core topics; Interactive Demonstration
Applets exploring key algorithms and other concepts; a Web Resources Guide containing an
extensive selection of links to external sites relevant to the world of discrete mathematics; extra
explanations and practice to help you master core concepts; added instruction on writing proofs
and on avoiding common mistakes in discrete mathematics; in-depth discussions of important
applications; and guidance on utilizing MapleTM software to explore the computational aspects
of discrete mathematics. Places in the text where these additional online resources are available
are identied in the margins by special icons. You will also nd (after fall 2012) the Virtual
Discrete Mathematics Tutor, an on-line resource that provides extra support to help you make
the transition from lower level courses to discrete mathematics. This tutorial should help answer
many of your questions and correct errors that you may make, based on errors other students
using this book, have made. For more details on these and other online resources, see the
description of the companion website immediately preceding this To the Student message.

\x0c'
