In this tutorial, well look into the common machine learning methods

o f supervised  and  unsupervised  learning,  and  common  algorithmic

approaches in  machine  learning,  including  the  k-nearest  neighbor

algorithm, decision tree learning, and deep learning. Well explore which

programming  languages  are  most  used  in  machine  learning,  providing

y o u with  some  of  the  positive  and  negative  attributes  of  each.

Additionally, well  discuss  biases  that  are  perpetuated  by  machine

learning algorithms,  and  consider  what  can  be  kept  in  mind  to  prevent

these biases when building algorithms.

Machine Learning Methods

In  machine  learning,  tasks  are  generally  classied  into  broad categories.

These categories are based on how learning is received or how feedback

on the learning is given to the system developed.

Two  of  the  most  widely  adopted  machine  learning  methods  are

supervised learning which trains algorithms based on example input and

output data that is labeled by humans, and unsupervised learning which

provides  the  algorithm with  no  labeled  data  in  order  to  allow  it  to  nd

structure  within  its input  data.  Lets  explore  these  methods  in  more

detail.

Supervised Learning

In  supervised  learning,  the  computer  is  provided  with  example  inputs

that are labeled with their desired outputs. The purpose of this method is

for  the  algorithm  to  be  able  to  learn  by  comparing  its actual  output

with  the  taught  outputs  to  nd  errors,  and  modify the  model

accordingly.  Supervised  learning  therefore  uses  patterns to predict label

values on additional unlabeled data.

\x0cFor example, with supervised learning, an algorithm may be fed data
with images of sharks labeled as fish  and images of oceans labeled  as 
water. By being trained on this data, the supervised learning algorithm
should  be  able  to  later  identify unlabeled  shark  images  as fish  and
unlabeled ocean images as water.

A  common  use  case of supervised  learning is to use  historical data to

predict  statistically  likely  future  events.  It  may  use  historical stock

market information to anticipate upcoming uctuations, or be employed

to  lter out spam emails. In supervised learning, tagged photos of dogs

can be used as input data to classify untagged photos of dogs.

Unsupervised Learning

In unsupervised learning, data is unlabeled, so the learning algorithm is

left  to  nd  commonalities  among  its  input  data.  As unlabeled  data  are

more  abundant  than  labeled  data,  machine  learning methods  that

facilitate unsupervised learning are particularly valuable.

The  goal  of  unsupervised  learning  may  be  as  straightforward  as

discovering hidden patterns within a dataset, but it may also have a goal

of  feature  learning,  which  allows  the  computational  machine  to

automatically discover the representations that are needed to classify raw

data.

Unsupervised  learning  is  commonly  used  for  transactional  data.  You

may  have  a  large  dataset  of  customers  and  their  purchases,  but  as  a

human  you  will  likely  not  be  able  to  make  sense  of  what  similar

attributes  can  be  drawn  from  customer  proles  and  their  types  of

purchases. With this data fed into an unsupervised learning algorithm, it

may  be  determined  that  women  of  a  certain  age  range who  buy

unscented  soaps  are  likely  to  be  pregnant,  and  therefore  a marketing

\x0ccampaign related to pregnancy and baby products can be targeted to this

audience in order to increase their number of purchases.

Without being told a correct answer, unsupervised learning methods

can look at complex data that is more expansive and seemingly unrelated

in  order  to  organize  it  in  potentially  meaningful  ways. Unsupervised

learning  is  often  used  for  anomaly  detection  including for  fraudulent

credit card purchases, and  recommender systems that recommend what

products to buy next. In unsupervised learning, untagged photos of dogs

can be used as input data for the algorithm to nd likenesses and classify

dog photos together.

Approaches

As a eld, machine learning is closely related to computational statistics,

so  having  a  background  knowledge 

in  statistics 

is  useful for

understanding and leveraging machine learning algorithms.

For those who may not have studied statistics, it can be helpful to rst

dene correlation and regression, as they are commonly used techniques

for 

investigating 

the 

relationship  among  quantitative variables.

Correlation is a measure of association between two variables that are not

designated  as  either  dependent  or independent. Regression  at  a  basic

level is used to examine the relationship between one dependent and one

independent variable.  Because  regression  statistics  can  be  used  to

anticipate  the dependent  variable  when  the  independent  variable  is

known, regression enables prediction capabilities.

Approaches  to  machine  learning  are  continuously  being  developed.

For our purposes, well go through a few of the popular approaches that

are being used in machine learning at the time of writing.

\x0ck-nearest neighbor

The k-nearest neighbor algorithm is a pattern recognition model that can

be  used  for  classication  as  well  as  regression.  Often abbreviated  as  k-

NN,  the k  in  k-nearest  neighbor  is a  positive  integer,  which  is  typically

small. In either classication or regression, the input will consist of the k

closest training examples within a space.

We will focus on k-NN classication. In this method, the output is class

membership.  This  will  assign  a  new  object  to  the  class  most common

among its k nearest neighbors. In the case of k = 1, the object is assigned

to the class of the single nearest neighbor.

Lets  look  at  an  example  of  k-nearest  neighbor.  In  the  diagram below,

there  are  blue  diamond  objects  and  orange  star  objects.  These belong  to

two separate classes: the diamond class and the star class.

\x0ck-nearest neighbor initial data set

When a new object is added to the space  in this case a green heart 

we  will  want  the  machine  learning  algorithm  to  classify  the  heart to  a

certain class.

\x0ck-nearest neighbor data set with new object to classify

When  we  choose  k  =  3,  the  algorithm  will  nd  the  three  nearest

neighbors of the green heart in order to classify it to either the diamond

class or the star class.

with the star class.

In our diagram, the three nearest neighbors of the green heart are one

diamond  and  two  stars.  Therefore,  the  algorithm  will  classify the  heart

\x0c'
