Afterword to the Tenth Anniversary Edition

An enormous amount has happened in quantum information science in the 10 years since
the rst edition of this book, and in this afterword we cannot summarize even a tiny
fraction of that work. But a few especially striking developments merit comment, and may
perhaps whet your appetite for more.

Perhaps the most impressive progress has been in the area of experimental implemen-
tation. While we are still many years from building large-scale quantum computers, much
progress has been made. Superconducting circuits have been used to implement simple
two-qubit quantum algorithms, and three-qubit systems are nearly within reach. Qubits
based on nuclear spins and single photons have been used, respectively, to demonstrate
proof-of-principle for simple forms of quantum error correction and quantum simulation.
But the most impressive progress of all has been made with trapped ion systems, which
have been used to implement many two- and three-qubit algorithms and algorithmic
building blocks, including the quantum search algorithm and the quantum Fourier trans-
form. Trapped ions have also been used to demonstrate basic quantum communication
primitives, including quantum error correction and quantum teleportation.

A second area of progress has been in understanding what physical resources are
required to quantum compute. Perhaps the most intriguing breakthrough here has been the
discovery that quantum computation can be done via measurement alone. For many years,
the conventional wisdom was that coherent superposition-preserving unitary dynamics
was an essential part of the power of quantum computers. This conventional wisdom
was blown away by the realization that quantum computation can be done without any
unitary dynamics at all. Instead, in some new models of quantum computation, quantum
measurements alone can be used to do arbitrary quantum computations. The only coherent
resource in these models is quantum memory, i.e., the ability to store quantum information.
An especially interesting example of these models is the one-way quantum computer, or
cluster-state computer. To quantum compute in the cluster-state model requires only
that the experimenter have possession of a xed universal state known as the cluster state.
With a cluster state in hand, quantum computation can be implemented simply by doing
a sequence of single-qubit measurements, with the particular computation done being
determined by which qubits are measured, when they are measured, and how they are
measured. This is remarkable: youre given a xed quantum state, and then quantum
compute by looking at the individual qubits in appropriate ways.

A third area of progress has been in classically simulating quantum systems. Feynmans
pioneering 1982 paper on quantum computing was motivated in part by the observation
that quantum systems often seem hard to simulate on conventional classical computers.
Of course, at the time there was only a limited understanding of how difcult it is
to simulate different quantum systems on ordinary classical computers. But in the 1990s
and, especially, in the 2000s, we have learned much about which quantum systems are easy

\x0cxx

Afterword to the Tenth Anniversary Edition

to simulate, and which are hard. Ingenious algorithms have been developed to classically
simulate many quantum systems that were formerly thought to be hard to simulate, in
particular, many quantum systems in one spatial dimension, and certain two-dimensional
quantum systems. These classical algorithms have been made possible by the development
of insightful classical descriptions that capture in a compact way much or all of the essential
physics of the system in question. At the same time, we have learned that some systems
that formerly seemed simple are surprisingly complex. For example, it has long been
known that quantum systems based on a certain type of optical component  what are
called linear optical systems  are easily simulated classically. So it was surprising when it
was discovered that adding two seemingly innocuous components  single-photon sources
and photodetectors  gave linear optics the full power of quantum computation. These
and similar investigations have deepened our understanding of which quantum systems
are easy to simulate, which quantum systems are hard to simulate, and why.

A fourth area of progress has been a greatly deepened understanding of quantum
communication channels. A beautiful and complete theory has been developed of how
entangled quantum states can assist classical communication over quantum channels. A
plethora of different quantum protocols for communication have been organized into
a comprehensive family (headed by mother and father protocols), unifying much
of our understanding of the different types of communication possible with quantum
information. A sign of the progress is the disproof of one of the key unsolved conjectures
reported in this book (p. 554), namely, that the communication capacity of a quantum
channel with product states is equal to the unconstrained capacity (i.e., the capacity with
any entangled state allowed as input). But, despite the progress, much remains beyond
our understanding. Only very recently, for example, it was discovered, to considerable
surprise, that two quantum channels, each with zero quantum capacity, can have a positive
quantum capacity when used together; the analogous result, with classical capacities over
classical channels, is known to be impossible.

One of the main motivations for work in quantum information science is the prospect of
fast quantum algorithms to solve important computational problems. Here, the progress
over the past decade has been mixed. Despite great ingenuity and effort, the chief algo-
rithmic insights stand as they were 10 years ago. There has been considerable technical
progress, but we do not yet understand what exactly it is that makes quantum comput-
ers powerful, or on what class of problems they can be expected to outperform classical
computers.

What is exciting, though, is that ideas from quantum computation have been used
to prove a variety of theorems about classical computation. These have included, for
example, results about the difculty of nding certain hidden vectors in a discrete lattice
of points. The striking feature is that these proofs, utilizing ideas of quantum computation,
are sometimes considerably simpler and more elegant than prior, classical proofs. Thus,
an awareness has grown that quantum computation may be a more natural model of
computation than the classical model, and perhaps fundamental results may be more
easily revealed through the ideas of quantum computation.

\x0cPreface

This book provides an introduction to the main ideas and techniques of the eld of
quantum computation and quantum information. The rapid rate of progress in this eld
and its cross-disciplinary nature have made it difcult for newcomers to obtain a broad
overview of the most important techniques and results of the eld.

Our purpose in this book is therefore twofold. First, we introduce the background
material in computer science, mathematics and physics necessary to understand quan-
tum computation and quantum information. This is done at a level comprehensible to
readers with a background at least the equal of a beginning graduate student in one or
more of these three disciplines; the most important requirements are a certain level of
mathematical maturity, and the desire to learn about quantum computation and quantum
information. The second purpose of the book is to develop in detail the central results of
quantum computation and quantum information. With thorough study the reader should
develop a working understanding of the fundamental tools and results of this exciting
eld, either as part of their general education, or as a prelude to independent research in
quantum computation and quantum information.

Structure of the book

The basic structure of the book is depicted in Figure 1. The book is divided into three
parts. The general strategy is to proceed from the concrete to the more abstract whenever
possible. Thus we study quantum computation before quantum information; specic
quantum error-correcting codes before the more general results of quantum information
theory; and throughout the book try to introduce examples before developing general
theory.

Part I provides a broad overview of the main ideas and results of the eld of quan-
tum computation and quantum information, and develops the background material in
computer science, mathematics and physics necessary to understand quantum compu-
tation and quantum information in depth. Chapter 1 is an introductory chapter which
outlines the historical development and fundamental concepts of the eld, highlighting
some important open problems along the way. The material has been structured so as
to be accessible even without a background in computer science or physics. The back-
ground material needed for a more detailed understanding is developed in Chapters 2
and 3, which treat in depth the fundamental notions of quantum mechanics and com-
puter science, respectively. You may elect to concentrate more or less heavily on different
chapters of Part I, depending upon your background, returning later as necessary to ll
any gaps in your knowledge of the fundamentals of quantum mechanics and computer
science.

Part II describes quantum computation in detail. Chapter 4 describes the fundamen-

\x0cxxii

Preface

(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:9) (cid:10)

(cid:26)(cid:3)(cid:5)(cid:23)(cid:4)(cid:7)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:27)
(cid:19)(cid:10)(cid:5)(cid:20)(cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:6)(cid:22)

(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:7)
(cid:30)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:14)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:12)(cid:20)(cid:22)

(cid:3)

(cid:8)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:11)(cid:10)(cid:23)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:12)(cid:10)(cid:5)
(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:23) (cid:24)(cid:28)(cid:15)(cid:11)(cid:28)(cid:12)(cid:15)(cid:29)

(cid:2)

(cid:19)(cid:10)(cid:7)(cid:25)(cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:11)
"(cid:20)(cid:12)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:20)(cid:15)

(cid:11)

(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:9) (cid:10)(cid:10)
(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:7)
(cid:19)(cid:10)(cid:7)(cid:25)(cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:12)(cid:10)(cid:5)

(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:9) (cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)
(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:7)
(cid:8)(cid:5)(cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:7)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:12)(cid:10)(cid:5)

(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:7)
(cid:19)(cid:12)(cid:11)(cid:20)(cid:3)(cid:12)(cid:6)(cid:22)

(cid:13)

(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:12)(cid:22)(cid:15) (cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:23)
(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:7) (cid:24)(cid:25)(cid:15)(cid:11)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:12)(cid:10)(cid:5)(cid:22) (cid:5)

#(cid:12)(cid:22)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:20)(cid:15)
(cid:30)(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:22)(cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:15)(cid:22) (cid:16)

(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:7)
(cid:26)(cid:10)(cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:12)(cid:15)(cid:11) (cid:13)(cid:11)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:22)(cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:7) (cid:12)

(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:7)
"(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:11)(cid:20)(cid:14)

(cid:15)

(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:7)
(cid:17)(cid:11)(cid:11)(cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:18)(cid:19)(cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:11)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:12)(cid:10)(cid:5) (cid:2)(cid:4)

(cid:17)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:11)(cid:10)(cid:25)(cid:16) (cid:2)(cid:2)

(cid:31)(cid:14)(cid:16)(cid:22)(cid:12)(cid:20)(cid:4)(cid:27)
 (cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:27)(cid:12)!(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:12)(cid:10)(cid:5)(cid:22) (cid:14)

(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:7) (cid:8)(cid:5)(cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:7)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:12)(cid:10)(cid:5)
(cid:13)(cid:14)(cid:15)(cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:16)

(cid:2)(cid:3)

Figure 1. Structure of the book.

tal elements needed to perform quantum computation, and presents many elementary
operations which may be used to develop more sophisticated applications of quantum
computation. Chapters 5 and 6 describe the quantum Fourier transform and the quantum
search algorithm, the two fundamental quantum algorithms presently known. Chapter 5
also explains how the quantum Fourier transform may be used to solve the factoring and
discrete logarithm problems, and the importance of these results to cryptography. Chap-
ter 7 describes general design principles and criteria for good physical implementations of
quantum computers, using as examples several realizations which have been successfully
demonstrated in the laboratory.

Part III is about quantum information: what it is, how information is represented and
communicated using quantum states, and how to describe and deal with the corruption of
quantum and classical information. Chapter 8 describes the properties of quantum noise
which are needed to understand real-world quantum information processing, and the
quantum operations formalism, a powerful mathematical tool for understanding quan-
tum noise. Chapter 9 describes distance measures for quantum information which allow
us to make quantitatively precise what it means to say that two items of quantum infor-
mation are similar. Chapter 10 explains quantum error-correcting codes, which may be
used to protect quantum computations against the effect of noise. An important result in
this chapter is the threshold theorem, which shows that for realistic noise models, noise
is in principle not a serious impediment to quantum computation. Chapter 11 introduces
the fundamental information-theoretic concept of entropy, explaining many properties of
entropy in both classical and quantum information theory. Finally, Chapter 12 discusses
the information carrying properties of quantum states and quantum communication chan-

\x0cPreface

xxiii

nels, detailing many of the strange and interesting properties such systems can have for
the transmission of information both classical and quantum, and for the transmission of
secret information.

A large number of exercises and problems appear throughout the book. Exercises are
intended to solidify understanding of basic material and appear within the main body of
the text. With few exceptions these should be easily solved with a few minutes work.
Problems appear at the end of each chapter, and are intended to introduce you to new
and interesting material for which there was not enough space in the main text. Often the
problems are in multiple parts, intended to develop a particular line of thought in some
depth. A few of the problems were unsolved as the book went to press. When this is the
case it is noted in the statement of the problem. Each chapter concludes with a summary
of the main results of the chapter, and with a History and further reading section that
charts the development of the main ideas in the chapter, giving citations and references
for the whole chapter, as well as providing recommendations for further reading.

The front matter of the book contains a detailed Table of Contents, which we encourage
you to browse. There is also a guide to nomenclature and notation to assist you as you
read.

The end matter of the book contains six appendices, a bibliography, and an index.
Appendix 1 reviews some basic denitions, notations, and results in elementary prob-
ability theory. This material is assumed to be familiar to readers, and is included for ease
of reference. Similarly, Apendix 2 reviews some elementary concepts from group theory,
and is included mainly for convenience. Appendix 3 contains a proof of the Solovay
Kitaev theorem, an important result for quantum computation, which shows that a nite
set of quantum gates can be used to quickly approximate an arbitrary quantum gate.
Appendix 4 reviews the elementary material on number theory needed to understand
the quantum algorithms for factoring and discrete logarithm, and the RSA cryptosystem,
which is itself reviewed in Appendix 5. Appendix 6 contains a proof of Liebs theorem,
one of the most important results in quantum computation and quantum information,
and a precursor to important entropy inequalities such as the celebrated strong subad-
ditivity inequality. The proofs of the SolovayKitaev theorem and Liebs theorem are
lengthy enough that we felt they justied a treatment apart from the main text.

The bibliography contains a listing of all reference materials cited in the text of the
book. Our apologies to any researcher whose work we have inadvertently omitted from
citation.

The eld of quantum computation and quantum information has grown so rapidly in
recent years that we have not been able to cover all topics in as much depth as we would
have liked. Three topics deserve special mention. The rst is the subject of entanglement
measures. As we explain in the book, entanglement is a key element in effects such as
quantum teleportation, fast quantum algorithms, and quantum error-correction. It is,
in short, a resource of great utility in quantum computation and quantum information.
There is a thriving research community currently eshing out the notion of entanglement
as a new type of physical resource, nding principles which govern its manipulation and
utilization. We felt that these investigations, while enormously promising, are not yet
complete enough to warrant the more extensive coverage we have given to other subjects
in this book, and we restrict ourselves to a brief taste in Chapter 12. Similarly, the sub-
ject of distributed quantum computation (sometimes known as quantum communication
complexity) is an enormously promising subject under such active development that we

\x0cx

xiv

Preface

have not given it a treatment for fear of being obsolete before publication of the book.
The implementation of quantum information processing machines has also developed
into a fascinating and rich area, and we limit ourselves to but a single chapter on this
subject. Clearly, much more can be said about physical implementations, but this would
begin to involve many more areas of physics, chemistry, and engineering, which we do
not have room for here.

How to use this book

This book may be used in a wide variety of ways. It can be used as the basis for a variety
of courses, from short lecture courses on a specic topic in quantum computation and
quantum information, through to full-year classes covering the entire eld. It can be
used for independent study by people who would like to learn just a little about quantum
computation and quantum information, or by people who would like to be brought up to
the research frontier. It is also intended to act as a reference work for current researchers
in the eld. We hope that it will be found especially valuable as an introduction for
researchers new to the eld.

Note to the independent reader
The book is designed to be accessible to the independent reader. A large number of exer-
cises are peppered throughout the text, which can be used as self-tests for understanding
of the material in the main text. The Table of Contents and end of chapter summaries
should enable you to quickly determine which chapters you wish to study in most depth.
The dependency diagram, Figure 1, will help you determine in what order material in
the book may be covered.

Note to the teacher
This book covers a diverse range of topics, and can therefore be used as the basis for a
wide variety of courses.

A one-semester course on quantum computation could be based upon a selection of
material from Chapters 1 through 3, depending on the background of the class, followed
by Chapter 4 on quantum circuits, Chapters 5 and 6 on quantum algorithms, and a
selection from Chapter 7 on physical implementations, and Chapters 8 through 10 to
understand quantum error-correction, with an especial focus on Chapter 10.

A one-semester course on quantum information could be based upon a selection of
material from Chapters 1 through 3, depending on the background of the class. Following
that, Chapters 8 through 10 on quantum error-correction, followed by Chapters 11 and 12
on quantum entropy and quantum information theory, respectively.

A full year class could cover all material in the book, with time for additional readings
selected from the History and further reading section of several chapters. Quantum com-
putation and quantum information also lend themselves ideally to independent research
projects for students.

Aside from classes on quantum computation and quantum information, there is another
way we hope the book will be used, which is as the text for an introductory class in quan-
tum mechanics for physics students. Conventional introductions to quantum mechanics
rely heavily on the mathematical machinery of partial differential equations. We believe
this often obscures the fundamental ideas. Quantum computation and quantum informa-

\x0c'
